# Alignment and feature counting with Cell Ranger

!!! quote ""

    The first step in the analysis of single cell RNAseq data is to align the sequenced reads against a genomic reference and then use a transcriptome annotation to generate read counts for each feature of interest. Typically for scRNAseq the features of interest are genes.
    
    There are a variety of tools for doing this and your choice will depend in part on the method by which the library was generated. For data generated using the 10x-Chromium method data the most common approach is to use the [Cell Ranger](https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/latest/what-is-cell-ranger) tool provided by 10x. This not only carries out the alignment and feature counting, but will also:
    
    - Call cells, i.e. filter the raw matrix to remove droplets that do not contain cells
    - Generate a very useful report in html format, which will provide some QC metrics and an initial look at the data
    - Generate a “cloupe” file, which can be opened using the [10x Loupe Browser](https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/visualization/latest/what-is-loupe-cell-browser) software to further explore the data.
    
    Cell Ranger is computationally very intensive, you will not be able to run it on a laptop or standard desktop computer. You will need access to, for example, a high performance computing (HPC) cluster, a server or other cloud-based computational resource with sufficient power - talk to your local IT support.
    
    Alternative methods include:
    
    - [STAR solo](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR/blob/master/docs/STARsolo.md) - this tool is built into the general purpose STAR aligner (Cell Ranger actually uses STAR under the hood). This will generate outputs very similar to Cell Ranger minus the cloupe file and the QC report. The advantage over Cell Ranger is that it is much less computationally intensive and will run with lower memory requirements in a shorter time.
    - [Alevin](https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/alevin.html) - This tool is based on the popular Salmon tool for bulk RNAseq feature counting. Alevin supports both 10x-Chromium and Drop-seq derived data.

    For the purposes of this course, seeing as we are working with 10x-Chromium derived data, we will use Cell Ranger. . As detailed instructions are available on the [Cell Ranger pages](https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/latest/what-is-cell-ranger) of the 10x website, this chapter will not be comprehensive in terms of all options, but should provide a brief overview.

## Index the reference genome

To index our genome, we can use the cellranger mkref tool with the following arguments (replacing {...} with the relevant piece of information):

```bash
cellranger mkref \
  --fasta={GENOME FASTA} \
  --genes={ANNOTATION GTF} \
  --genome={OUTPUT FOLDER FOR INDEX} \
  --nthreads={CPUS}
```
where:

!!! info ""

    - `GENOME FASTA` is a file containing the reference genome in FASTA format
    - `ANNOTATION GTF` is a file containing the transcript annotation file in GTF format
    - `OUTPUT FOLDER FOR INDEX`is a name for the output folder containing the new reference package (you do not need to create this folder)
    - `CPUS` - Is the number of CPUs we would like CellRanger to use. The more CPUs CellRanger can use, the faster the job (up to a point).

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash
    cd sc-rna-data
    
    module purge && module load CellRanger/7.1.0
    
    cellranger mkref \
      --fasta=./Data/references/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.chromosome.21.fa \
      --genes=./Data/references/gencode.v41.primary_assembly.annotation.chr21.gtf \
      --genome=./Data/references/cellranger_index \
      --nthreads 4
    ```

## Cell Ranger `count`

### Preparing the raw fastq files

To run Cell Ranger count the fastq files for samples to be processed should be placed in a single directory. Cell Ranger will be run separately on each sample. You will need to provide the software with the sample name (e.g. SRR9264343) of the sample to be processed. Cell Ranger expects the file names of the fastq files to follow a specific convention so that it can correctly identify the files for the specific sample. If the files names of your fastqs do not match this convention you will need to rename them.

The convention is the default convention used by `bcl2fastq` (the tool that converts the raw sequencing data in `bcl` format into `fastq` files):

```bash
<SampleName>_S<SampleNumber>_L00<Lane>_<Read>_001.fastq.gz
```
!!! quote ""

    - `<SampleName>` - An identifier for the sample, this is what Cell Ranger uses to determine which fastq files to combine into a single sample.
    - `<SampleNumber>` - This is the sample number based on the order that samples were listed in the sample sheet used when running bcl2fastq. This is not important for Cell Ranger, other than it indicates the end of the Sample Name, you can set all your samples to S1.
    - `<Lane>` - The lane number. If your sequencing was run across multiple lanes, then you may have multiple sets of fastqs for a single sample with different lane numbers.
    - `<Read>` - The read type: R1 for Read 1, R2 for Read 2, and index reads are I1 and I2.
    001 - The last segment is always 001.

e.g. for a single sample in the Caron data set we have:

```bash
    SRR9264343_S0_L001_I1_001.fastq.gz
    SRR9264343_S0_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz
    SRR9264343_S0_L001_R2_001.fastq.gz
```